feat: :sparkles: section on data sharing (#120)
onlimit-study/dmp: sections/sharing.qmd

# Data Sharing

Sharing data from research projects is essential for promoting
transparency, reproducibility, and collaboration within the scientific
community. By making data findable, accessible, interoperable, and
reusable (FAIR), we enable other researchers to build upon existing
work, validate findings, and generate new insights. This section
outlines how data and metadata from the project will be shared, under
what conditions, and with what safeguards in place.

## How will the data and metadata be shared?

> Metadata describing the structure, variables, and scope of the dataset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will make the metadata describing the structure, variables, and scope of the dataset
```

Active voice.

will be made publicly available through the project website, using the
[Seedcase Flower platform](https://seedcase-project.org/roadmap/). This
will allow researchers (internal and external) to explore the metadata
before submitting an access request. The actual research data will not
be openly accessible and will only be shared upon formal application and

> approval.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
approval, and only through a secure server.
```

## When will the metadata be available?

We aim to start metadata publication as soon as data collection starts.
A preliminary release will be based on the feasibility study, which we

> plan to use as a test case for the metadata infrastructure. While this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
plan to use as a test case for the metadata infrastructure. While we primarily intend to use this
```

dataset is primarily intended to help iron out any issues with the two

> most demanding arms of the study, it can be used as a “dress rehearsal”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
most demanding arms of the study, it can be used as a testing ground
```

Limit analogies. Not everyone (who are ESL) might understand this reference.

for the metadata sharing process. We do not expect high external demand
for the feasibility data, but it will help ensure readiness for the main
study.

## Who is the audience for the data?

We anticipate that most data access requests will come from researchers
affiliated with the study or collaborating institutions. However,
external researchers may also apply, provided they meet the criteria
outlined in the data access guideline. The audience may include clinical
researchers, epidemiologists, or data scientists researching
diabetes-related topics, as well as anthropologist or other social
scientists looking at behaviour in relation to food and exercise for
people with type 2 diabetes.

## How will researchers get access to the data?

Researchers must submit a formal application detailing their planned use
of the data, including which specific data points they require and why.
Applications involving sensitive data categories must include a clear
justification for their necessity (for instance in cases where the data
is to be uploaded to Denmark Statistics). We will develop a guide on
the application process, including eligibility criteria and review

> procedures and that we will make available as a website.

Reviewer 2: we can do this after the feasibility study - that note can be added

<!--TODO Write the guidance document mentioned above-->

## How will the data be made available?

Once an application is approved, the requested data will be made
available in a dedicated project folder on
[GenomeDK](https://genome.au.dk) (GDK). Raw data must remain on the GDK
server, and only analysis scripts and results may be exported.
Researchers will need to create an account with GDK to access the folder
and work on their analysis environment. In some cases, it may be
possible to upload a dataset to [Statistics
Denmark](https://www.dst.dk/en), where it will be accessible in the SCDA

> project database. This option will be considered for projects requiring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project database. We only consider this option for projects requiring
```

linkage with other national datasets.

## How will access be controlled?

There are three main ways to access data, only one should be used for
data analysis. Data will be available to a few members of the study team
on REDCap where data collection is being done. All data collected by the
LIVA app will be available to clinicians involved with the running of

> the study in the LIVA system. Finally all research data will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the study in the LIVA system. Finally, the research data we have
```

collected, cleaned and stored on GDK servers where all analysis should
take place. Access to the finalised research data will be controlled by
the central study team on GDK, with each successful data application
getting their own project folder with only the data requested. All the
scripts used to create these data sets will be stored in the main study
folder on GDK to ensure transparency and reproducibility. We expect that
those who have access to the data collected within REDCap will not use
the data for analysis and/or publication. The data collected by LIVA
will be available through the use of the Clinician Portal and LIVA
Reporting Module, which is encouraged for monitoring participant
progress but should not be used for publication purposes.

## What kind of IP or license will be used?

A formal decision regarding intellectual property rights and licensing
for shared data is still pending. This will be finalized before the main
study data is made available to external researchers.

## Additional considerations

Some data from the feasibility study may need to be shared and analysed

> before the launch of the main study, the end points in the study

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before the launch of the main study, but the formal end points in the study
```
